Digital Born

I am sure you are asking yourself, as you read this first post of this new blog, something like: "Why in the hell would I read another blog about digital preservation." Well, first off I am not sure I need your hostile attitude, but you do bring up a good point. There are several great digital preservation resources out there. They cover everything from OAIS [that one post on OAIS] to detailed discussions of file formats [JP2 post], to why digital preservation [LoC post] in the first place. With all these bases covered, what am I hoping to add to the discussion? 

You ask a very good question, but I am going to delay my answer, just for a minute or two, with a story. Before my current position as a digital preservation librarian, I worked in two very different archives (grant funded short-term positions, but that is for a different blog). One was built around gathering machine readable data since the days of punch cards. They were seen as leaders in the field of digital preservation, and even hosted training sessions on that topic. The other was in the midst of coping with its first sustained digital effort. It was going through the pains of shifting from projects to programs. To this organization, a terabyte was a lot of fucking bytes, from both the technical and financial perspectives. The differences between these organizations were not commitment or professionalism but resources, knowledge, and experience. It was very hard to implement anything close to what experts have defined as "best practice" in the second organization. So, then what? What the hell does "OK" or "good" practice look like?

These thoughts were in my head, rolling around between recipes I want to try and why, why is Denard throwing so many interceptions!?! Stop throwing off your back foot for the love of… Sorry. My digital preservation thoughts were given more focus these past few months, starting at iPRES [LINK], the international digital preservation conference. During the keynote, Steve Knight from the National Library of New Zealand questioned the divide between digital preservation research and practice, and the inability of current tools and standards to help a wide range of institutions. What resonated most with me, was his question of why there were so few archivists and librarians at the conference. Where were the implementers? I was trying my best to tweet these bombs as they were thrown, and they resonated with others as well [LINKS]. The divide between research and practice is a hole that is filled with most cultural heritage organizations, unable to implement tools and practice being churned out by a valuable, smart, but often disconnected research community. I encourage you to read Bram van der Werf's, of the Open Planets Foundation, outstanding blog post [http://www.openplanetsfoundation.org/blogs/2013-01-04-digital-preservation-learning-it-doing-it] on Steve Knight's keynote, and things we can do to start bridging the divide. As you can see in that post, Bram is leading OPF in a direction to facilitate a more bottom up approach to digital preservation, where practice drives research, not the other way around. 

Bram's approach is great, and hopefully begin to change how digital preservation practice is developed. There is another pice of this though. My understanding of this pice is informed by my brief but impactful time at those previous institutions. So, to finally answer your question. I hope this blog can contribute to a discussion on filling the gaps between "best" and "bad" practice. I hope to talk about what folks are implementing now, how current tools and practice can be evaluated. Mostly, I would like try to articulate the need for defined practices that not only focus on perfect solutions, but solutions that are implementable by resource and expertise strapped institutions. 

My next post will focus more on what I perceive as the gaps between "best" and "bad" practice. I am promise not to bring up football again much. 





